AUTHORS
=======
Unless otherwise indicated, all files in this package were authored
Mike Fisk <mfisk@lanl.gov>.

LICENSE
=======
This software and ancillary information (herein called "SOFTWARE")
called "SMACQ" is made available under the terms described here.  The
SOFTWARE has been approved for release with associated LA-CC number
02-058.
  
Unless otherwise indicated, this SOFTWARE has been authored by an
employee or employees of the University of California, operator of the
Los Alamos National Laboratory under Contract No. W-7405-ENG-36 with
the U.S.  Department of Energy. The U.S. Government has rights to use,
reproduce, and distribute this SOFTWARE. The public may copy,
distribute, prepare derivative works and publicly display this
SOFTWARE without charge, provided that this Notice and any statement
of authorship are reproduced on all copies. Neither the Government nor
the University makes any warranty, express or implied, or assumes any
liability or responsibility for the use of this SOFTWARE. If SOFTWARE
is modified to produce derivative works, such modified SOFTWARE should
be clearly marked, so as not to confuse it with the version available
from LANL.

All source-code contained here-in is relesased under the GNU Lesser
General Public License version 2.1, unless stated otherwise elsewhere
in this distribution.
  
If you have not received a copy of the GNU Lesser General Public
License, write to the Free Software Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place,
Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111-1307 USA.

NON-LANL WORKS
==============
The following software is included in this package and the authors
greatfully acknowledged:

TCPDUMP
-------
pcap handling routines were derived from tcpdump, which was developed by
the Network Research Group at Lawrence Berkeley National Lab, and is
copyrighted by the University of California Regents.
  	
GNULIB
------
The code in the libgnu directory is imported from the gnulib project.
The copyright for this code is held by the Free Software Foundation
and the code is released under the GPL and/or LGPL license, as
specified in each file.

PATRICIA
--------
The PATRICIA implementation in the patricia subdirectory is extracted
from Dave Plonka's Net::Patricia package (released under the GPL) for
perl which in turn extracted it from MRT's patricia code from
radix.[ch], which was worked on by Masaki Hirabaru and Craig Labovitz.
For more info on MRT see: http://www.mrtd.net/
   
The MRT patricia code owes some heritage to GateD's radix code, which
in turn owes something to the BSD kernel.
